LLM-Based Intent Extraction Interface
1. Purpose and Scope
This section defines how a Large Language Model (LLM) is used within the architecture for Intent Extraction and Directive Classification. The LLM is treated as a semantic interpretation component, not an execution authority.
This specification establishes: - The architectural role of the LLM - The strict input/output contract - Prompt structure and behavioral constraints - The software interface boundary used by the system
This section is designed to be fully standalone and reusable across implementations.

2. Architectural Role of the LLM
Within this architecture, the LLM functions as a semantic compiler front-end.
Responsibilities: - Interpret natural-language directives - Classify directive intent - Populate the Intent Object schema
Non-responsibilities: - Planning or task decomposition - Execution decisions - Actuator control - State mutation
All downstream logic operates exclusively on the structured Intent Object produced by the LLM.

3. Input Contract
3.1 Input Content
The LLM receives: - A single directive (natural language or structured text) - Optional system context (domain, system mode, constraints)
The directive must be treated as immutable input.

3.2 Input Constraints
One directive per invocation
No conversational memory is assumed
No side effects are permitted
The LLM must not infer execution strategy beyond intent classification.

4. Output Contract
4.1 Output Format
The LLM must output valid JSON only conforming to the Intent Object schema.
No explanatory text, commentary, or markdown is permitted in the output.

4.2 Required Fields
At minimum, the output must include: - intent_id - directive_source - directive_type - planning_required - urgency_level - risk_level - expected_response_type - confidence_score
Optional fields may be included if confidence is sufficient.

5. Prompt Structure Specification
The LLM prompt must include the following sections:
5.1 Role Definition
Defines the LLM’s function as an intent classifier and schema generator.
5.2 Allowed Directive Classes
Explicit enumeration of directive types and valid enum values.
5.3 Planner Invocation Rules
Clear rules defining when planning_required may be set to true.
5.4 Schema Definition
An inline description of the Intent Object fields and constraints.
5.5 Output Rules
Strict instruction to return JSON only and nothing else.

6. Example Prompt (Illustrative)
The following illustrates the structure of a compliant prompt. Exact wording may vary.

System Role: You are an intent extraction module. Your task is to classify directives and output a structured Intent Object.
Directive Classes: - cognitive - analytical - goal_oriented - behavioral - supervisory
Planner Rules: Set planning_required to true only if the directive requires multi-step execution, coordination, or state change.
Schema Requirements: Return a JSON object with the following fields: intent_id, directive_source, directive_type, planning_required, urgency_level, risk_level, expected_response_type, confidence_score.
Output Rules: Return valid JSON only. Do not include explanations.
Directive: 

7. Software Interface Boundary
The architecture isolates LLM usage behind a dedicated adapter interface.
7.1 Intent Extraction Interface
class IntentExtractionInterface:
    def extract_intent(self, directive_text: str) -> IntentObject:
        """
        Accepts a directive string and returns a populated Intent Object.
        """
        pass

7.2 LLM Adapter Responsibilities
The adapter is responsible for: - Prompt construction - LLM invocation (API or local model) - JSON validation - Schema compliance checking - Confidence threshold enforcement
The rest of the system must never interact directly with the LLM.

8. Error Handling and Fallback Strategy
The interface must handle the following failure modes:
Invalid JSON output
Schema violations
Low confidence scores
Ambiguous or underspecified directives
Recommended fallback behaviors include: - Re-prompting with stricter constraints - Rule-based classification - Requesting clarification - Escalation to human oversight

9. Performance and Deployment Considerations
9.1 Development Phase
API-based LLM usage is acceptable
Mock adapters may be used for testing
Hardware requirements are minimal
9.2 Production / Advanced Phase
Local LLM deployment may be introduced
Common directive patterns may be cached or replaced with classifiers
LLM usage frequency should be minimized via routing rules

10. Architectural Impact
This interface: - Cleanly separates semantic understanding from control logic - Enables rapid evolution of NLP technology without architectural change - Supports both lightweight development environments and high-performance deployments
By constraining the LLM to structured intent extraction, the architecture gains the benefits of modern language understanding without sacrificing determinism, safety, or auditability.

11. Summary
The LLM-Based Intent Extraction Interface formalizes how natural language directives are transformed into structured intent representations. By enforcing strict contracts and isolating LLM behavior, the architecture ensures that semantic intelligence enhances—rather than destabilizes—the overall system.
This component completes the semantic front-end of the architecture and provides a stable foundation for routing, planning, and execution layers.