Intent Object Schema
1. Purpose and Role
The Intent Object is the structured representation produced by the Intent Extraction process. It serves as the formal contract between semantic understanding (NLP / LLM-based interpretation) and deterministic system control (routing, planning, execution).
This object allows the system to reason about a directive without reinterpreting natural language and enables auditable, testable, and extensible behavior.
The Intent Object is deliberately designed to be: - Explicit and machine-readable - Stable across execution paths - Independent of the underlying NLP or LLM implementation

2. Design Principles
The Intent Object schema follows these principles:
Separation of concerns – semantic interpretation is isolated from execution logic
Determinism – downstream modules operate on structured fields, not text
Extensibility – new fields can be added without breaking existing logic
Auditability – every execution decision can be traced back to intent metadata
Technology neutrality – the schema does not assume a specific LLM or classifier

3. Core Intent Object Fields
The following fields constitute the minimum required schema.
3.1 intent_id
Type: String (UUID or equivalent)
A unique identifier assigned to the intent instance. This ID enables tracking across routing, planning, execution, and logging subsystems.

3.2 directive_source
Type: Enum
Identifies the origin of the directive.
Allowed values: - human - perception - internal
This field does not determine execution strategy but provides context for policy decisions and auditing.

3.3 directive_type
Type: Enum
Classifies the semantic intent of the directive.
Initial allowed values: - cognitive - analytical - goal_oriented - behavioral - supervisory
This field is the primary driver for routing decisions.

3.4 planning_required
Type: Boolean
Indicates whether the directive requires planning, task decomposition, or coordinated execution.
This field acts as a first-level gate before invoking the planner.

3.5 urgency_level
Type: Enum
Represents time sensitivity.
Allowed values: - low - normal - high - critical
Urgency influences scheduling, prioritization, and potential preemption of other work.

3.6 risk_level
Type: Enum
Represents potential negative impact of incorrect or delayed execution.
Allowed values: - none - low - moderate - high
Risk level may trigger safeguards, human confirmation, or conservative execution policies.

3.7 expected_response_type
Type: Enum
Defines the form of the expected output.
Allowed values: - textual_response - structured_data - plan - action - monitoring_process
This field helps downstream modules prepare appropriate response handling.

3.8 confidence_score
Type: Float (0.0 – 1.0)
Represents the confidence of the intent extraction process.
Low confidence scores may trigger secondary validation, fallback rules, or clarification requests.

4. Optional and Extended Fields
The following fields are optional but recommended for advanced control and future expansion.
4.1 domain_context
Type: String or Enum
Specifies the functional domain relevant to the directive (e.g., software_architecture, manufacturing, robotics, research).

4.2 suggested_modules
Type: List of Strings
Identifies candidate modules likely to be involved in execution or response.
Examples: - nlp - planner - perception - actuator_control - knowledge_store

4.3 execution_constraints
Type: Object
Captures any constraints inferred from the directive.
Examples: - time limits - resource limits - safety restrictions

4.4 clarification_required
Type: Boolean
Indicates whether the directive is underspecified or ambiguous.
When true, execution should pause pending additional input.

5. Example Intent Object (Illustrative)
{
  "intent_id": "a7c1f2c4-8c3b-4bfa-9c9d-1b3c8f0a21ef",
  "directive_source": "human",
  "directive_type": "cognitive",
  "planning_required": false,
  "urgency_level": "normal",
  "risk_level": "none",
  "expected_response_type": "textual_response",
  "confidence_score": 0.94,
  "domain_context": "computer_networks",
  "suggested_modules": ["nlp", "knowledge_store"],
  "clarification_required": false
}

6. Lifecycle and Usage
The Intent Object is created once per directive and persists through: - Routing decisions - Planner invocation (if required) - Task execution - Logging and diagnostics - Reflection and learning loops
It must remain immutable after creation, except for system-generated annotations stored separately.

7. Architectural Impact
By standardizing intent representation, the architecture gains: - Clear boundaries between cognition and control - Reduced coupling between NLP and execution layers - Simplified planner logic - Enhanced traceability for debugging, analytics, and patent documentation
The Intent Object is a cornerstone artifact that enables the system to scale from simple conversational behavior to complex, multi-agent, and cyber-physical execution.

8. Summary
The Intent Object schema formalizes the output of intent extraction into a stable, extensible, and auditable structure. It allows the system to make informed execution decisions without reprocessing natural language and provides a durable foundation for planning, routing, and learning across the entire architecture.